_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_

## Improved Visual Saliency of Graph Clusters with Orderable Node-Link Layouts


[Nora Al-Naami](https://orcid.org/0009-0005-5077-2062) [, Nicolas Médoc](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7419-8748) [, Matteo Magnani](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3437-9018) [, Mohammad Ghoniem](https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6745-3651)


Fig. 1: A 100-node synthetic network having three clusters with ‘ _low_ ’ within-cluster and ‘ _low_ ’ between-cluster link probability, laid out
from left to right according to the ‘ _Linlog_ ’ layout, vanilla ‘ _arc diagram_ ’, symmetric ‘ _arc diagram_ ’ and ‘ _radial diagram_ ’. The clusters are
indiscernible in the Linlog diagram, and clearly visible in the orderable layouts, where nodes are in the original graph generation order.


**Abstract** —Graphs are often used to model relationships between entities. The identification and visualization of clusters in graphs
enable insight discovery in many application areas, such as life sciences and social sciences. Force-directed graph layouts promote
the visual saliency of clusters, as they bring adjacent nodes closer together, and push non-adjacent nodes apart. At the same time,
matrices can effectively show clusters when a suitable row/column ordering is applied, but are less appealing to untrained users not
providing an intuitive node-link metaphor. It is thus worth exploring layouts combining the strengths of the node-link metaphor and node
ordering. In this work, we study the impact of node ordering on the visual saliency of clusters in orderable node-link diagrams, namely
radial diagrams, arc diagrams and symmetric arc diagrams. Through a crowdsourced controlled experiment, we show that users can
count clusters consistently more accurately, and to a large extent faster, with orderable node-link diagrams than with three state-of-the
art force-directed layout algorithms, i.e., _‘Linlog’_, _‘Backbone’_ and _‘sfdp’_ . The measured advantage is greater in case of low cluster
separability and/or low compactness. A free copy of this paper and all supplemental materials are available at `[https://osf.io/kc3dg/](https://osf.io/kc3dg/)` .


**Index Terms** —network visualization, arc diagrams, radial diagrams, cluster perception, graph seriation


**1** **INTRODUCTION**


Graph visualization is widely used to support network analysis tasks
in various areas of science and engineering [43]. One popular network
analysis task consists in identifying locally dense subgraphs [54], often
called ‘ _clusters_ ’, or ‘ _communities_ ’ in social network analysis [10], or
‘ _modules_ ’ in biological network analysis [14]. Indeed, graph clusters
correspond to meaningful sub-structures in many applications [84].
Hence, when asked to lay out a graph interactively, users tend to prioritize the formation of clusters over other aesthetic considerations [82].
Graph clusters are often visually identified by drawing the graph
using a force-directed node-link layout algorithm. This category of
algorithms uses physics-based models, whereby attraction forces place
adjacent nodes (see Section 2) closer to each other, and repulsive forces
place non-adjacent nodes farther apart [35, 48, 84]. Hence, when the
graph contains clusters, nodes belonging to the same cluster tend to
clump together in the 2D plane. This makes clusters visually salient in
virtue of the Gestalt rule of proximity [48], without using any additional
visual cues to denote cluster membership, such as node color. In a recent
comparison of many force-directed layouts, the LinLog layout [64,


_• Nora Al-Naami, Nicolas Médoc and Mohammad Ghoniem are with_
_Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology._
_E-mail: {nora.alnaami | nicolas.medoc | mohammad.ghoniem}@list.lu ._

_• Matteo Magnani is with Uppsala University._
_E-mail: matteo.magnani@it.uu.se ._


_Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication_
_xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on_
_obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org._
_Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx_


65] has consistently outperformed other alternatives [60]. The best
cluster separation is generally achieved when internal link density
within clusters is high, and external link density is low, i.e., relatively
fewer links exist between nodes sitting in distinct clusters [65].
Another approach uses adjacency matrices as a visual metaphor to
analyze graphs. Nodes are mapped to the rows and columns of a matrix,
while links appear as colored rectangles at the intersection of adjacent
(rows/columns) nodes. Besides being more readable for many low-level
perceptual tasks, for large and dense graphs [34], matrices are effective
at showing graph clusters when a suitable row/column ordering is
applied [41]. Following Bertin’s work on table seriation [12], much
work compared various methods for reordering matrix visualizations
to elicit structural properties [11, 30]. Matrices are yet a less popular
graph visualization, and are less appealing to untrained users [34].
In this work, we retain the node-link metaphor owing to its popularity
and intuitiveness and, we apply node ordering to elicit clusters, inspired
by the proven effectiveness of node ordering in matrix visualizations.
The node-link layouts where nodes can be ordered include the ones that
place nodes on a continuous non-self-intersecting topological curve,
e.g., a circle, an ellipse, a straight line or a space-filling curve. Nodes
can be ordered along such a curve, e.g., based on topological or attributebased criteria. In this paper, we will refer to such layouts, as ‘ _orderable_
_node-link layouts_ ’. This category includes ‘ _arc diagrams_ ’ [86] and

and along a circle, respectively. Edges are drawn as half circles in arc

lack user studies regarding their readability for perceptual tasks.
This paper raises the following research question: how do orderable

and to one another regarding their ability to reveal node clusters in


1


graphs? To do so, we contribute a crowdsourced empirical study whose
dependent variables are the accuracy and completion time of cluster
count judgement, under varying values of independent variables which
are cluster compactness, cluster separability, node ordering method,
graph size and graph layout. We elicit new insights regarding how three
popular orderable node-link diagrams (arc diagrams, symmetric

force-directed layouts (Linlog, Backbone and sfdp). We also assess
the impact of two different node ordering methods (the optimal leaf
ordering and the cross reduction algorithms) on the effectiveness of
orderable layouts, in addition to the original node order provided by
the graph generator. Finally, we derive guidelines for the use of these
layouts based on graph characteristics and type of clusters.


**2** **RELATED WORK**

Our work builds on previous research in the areas of graph visualization,
and graph seriation, as well as user studies related to these areas.


**2.1** **Graph Visualization**

Graphs are commonly used to model relationships between entities.
They have been used to analyze complex phenomena in many application fields, such as social sciences, biology, and transportation [84].
Formally, a graph _G_ is defined as _G_ = ( _V,_ _E_ ) where _V_ is a set of vertices
and _E ⊆_ _V ×V_ is the set of edges connecting pairs of vertices in _G_ . Two
vertices _u ∈_ _V_ and _v ∈_ _V_ are said to be _adjacent_, if _∃e ∈_ _E_ : _e_ = ( _u,_ _v_ ).
The popularity of graphs has motivated much research on graph
drawing and network visualization [8, 25]. In _node-link diagrams_, vertices are displayed as nodes, e.g., circles, and edges as links, e.g., curves.
Many algorithms produce such diagrams in 2D and 3D [35,43]. In their
survey, von Landesberger et al. [84] categorize node-link layouts into
_force-directed_, _constraint-based_ [28], _multiscale_ [49], _layered_ [27] and
_non-standard_ layouts, e.g., projection-based layouts [39].
Force-directed layouts adopt a physics-based model, e.g., springs
and masses, or electric particles, whose equilibrium determines the
position of nodes such that adjacent nodes are placed closer to each
other [40, 59]. They are hence well-suited for cluster visualization [35],
in virtue of the Gestalt proximity law [48]. The ‘ _Linlog_ ’ energy models improve the visual separation of clusters compared to prior forcedirected layouts [64, 65]. Meidiana et al. [60] used a quality metric
score to compare force-directed layouts (e.g., Fruchter-Reingold [31]),
multi-level layouts (e.g., FM3 [37], sfdp [29, 45]), multi-dimensional
scaling methods (e.g., MDS [80], pivot MDS [17]), stress-based layouts (e.g., Stress Majorization [33]), spectral layouts (e.g., with graph
Laplacian) with other layouts designed for cluster discovery, such as
Backbone [69], tsNET [50] and Linlog [64]. They found that the Linlog
layout performed well across many graph data sets, and generally better
than competing algorithms [35], followed by Backbone and tsNET.
Other node-link layouts place nodes along a geometric locus. For

diagrams [63,86] and BioFabric [32] place them along a straight line.
These layouts are special cases of constraint-based layouts [28], where
graph nodes are placed along the given locus, be it a circle, an ellipse, a
straight-line, or a space-filling curve, e.g., Hilbert curves [61, 88]. Such
layouts are orderable, since nodes can be sorted along the underlying
geometric locus. User studies on the impact of node ordering on the

When the vertices and edges of the graph have attributes attached to
them, distinct types of graphs and graph visualization problems arise.
This has given birth to specific lines of graph visualization research
including, for example, multivariate graphs [67], multipartite graphs [5],
dynamic graphs [9] and multilayer graphs [58]. Many attribute-based
techniques take a faceted layout approach to show subgraphs, e.g.,
parallel 1-D axes in PivotGraph [87], parallel 2-D planes (showing
edges on demand) as in Semantic Substrates [78] or NodeXL [79].
In this work, we focus on the perception of clusters in single-mode
unweighted unattributed graphs, without prior ground truth about clus
state-of-the-art force-directed layouts, i.e., Linlog, Backbone and
sfdp, in terms of visual cluster perception.


**2.2** **Graph Seriation**

Graph seriation [56] is the arrangement of nodes and their edges in a
visualization to elicit hidden graph patterns, which reveal key properties
of the underlying network [11, 62]. Seriation was mainly applied to
tables and matrices [56, 73, 75]. In a network, node ordering algorithms
aim to reveal latent network patterns to the user [59]. They can be
divided into _attribute-based_ algorithms, e.g., ordering nodes based on
their label and _topology-based_ or _seriation_ algorithms [56].
Focusing on adjacency matrices, Behrisch et al. [11] distinguish
seven families of ordering methods, based on common underlying reordering concepts [11]: 1) Robinsonian methods, e.g., clustering-based
algorithms, including the _Optimal Leaf Ordering_ [6] (OLO); 2) spectral methods, e.g., rank-two ellipse seriation [19]; 3) dimensionality
reduction methods, e.g., multi-dimensional scaling [15]; 4) heuristic
methods, e.g., the crossing reduction heuristic (CR), also known as the
barycenter heuristic [57]; 5) graph-theoretic methods, e.g., based on the
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) [55]; 6) biclustering methods [22];
7) interactive reordering methods, e.g., the Bertifier [73]. They benchmark many seriation methods against many real and synthetic graphs, in
terms of execution time and quality of the resulting matrix visualization
using the _minimum linear arrangement_ score [74]. They conclude that
cluster identification is better supported by clustering-based techniques.
They recommend the use of OLO, as it optimizes for cluster patterns at
the global and local levels, e.g., placing nodes at the boundary of their
cluster closer to their neighbors in other clusters.
In this empirical study, we take a user perception perspective on node
ordering, with three understudied orderable node-link layouts

. Our study considers the OLO order, as recommended by Berisch
et al. [11], and the CR order, which was also used by Oeke et al. [70] in
their cluster perception task, and in PivotGraph [87] to minimize edge
crossings between parallel 1-D axes. In this work, OLO is based on the
hierarchical clustering algorithm with average linkage. This puts this
work close to other studies using hierarchical clustering to order graph
nodes, e.g., by Abdelaal et al. [1] who do not mention using leaf order
optimization explicitly. With this empirical study, we compare the two
ordering methods systematically to one another when applied to

and also to three state-of-the-art force-directed layouts, i.e.,
Linlog, Backbone and sfdp, in terms of cluster perception.


**2.3** **User Studies on Cluster Perception in Graphs**

Lee et al. categorize graph visualization tasks into _topology-based_,
_attribute-based_, _browsing_ and _overview_ tasks [54]. They consider
cluster identification as a topology-based task, and underscore that an
overview of the graph will usually help to find patterns, such as clusters,
if a suitable graph layout is used. This is typically what force-directed
node-link layouts aim to do, as well as matrix seriation methods, as
pointed out earlier. Vehlow et al. survey visual encodings of group
structure information in graph visualizations [83]. They deliberately
exclude the use of layout for this purpose from their scope, but mention
in passing the possibility to use 1-D layouts to implicitly encode group
information, where nodes are placed along a circle or a linear axis.
They focus on other visual encodings, like the use of node color or
hulls and contours for cluster membership. They categorize groups into
flat versus hierarchically structured, and disjoint versus overlapping.
They also position previous work based on the type of visual encoding
used to convey group membership information.
Many user studies on cluster perception in graph visualizations
compare force-directed layouts to adjacency matrices and cover various
graph visualization tasks such as path-related, attribute-based, overview
and memorability tasks. Okoe et al. [70] compare node-link layouts
generated using _neato_ [29] and matrix visualizations ordered by the
crossing reduction method from _Reorderjs_ [30]. Based on two real
graphs having 258 and 332 nodes, they show that matrices outperform
force-directed layouts for the perception of colored clusters. Nobre
et al. also confirmed the superiority of matrices for cluster perception in
multivariate networks, based on two real 75- and 25-node graphs [68].
Chen et al. also studied cluster perception using an interactive toroidal
layout, with automatic panning [21]. They used synthetic graphs of
variable density comprising 68 to 134 nodes and 3 to 8 clusters. They


2


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


show that toroidal wrap layouts support faster and more accurate cluster
perception than ‘standard’ force-directed layouts. Several studies on
clustered graphs have used much larger graphs, though [24].
Other studies go beyond force-directed node-link layouts and adjacency matrices. For example, to solve path-related problems typical of
adjacency matrices, Henry-Riche et al. [42] compare the Linlog layout
to MatLink, a hybrid visualization composed of an arc diagram drawn
on the side of a matrix ordered by a TSP heuristic. Based on six open
data sets with less than 100 nodes with varying densities, they find
that MatLink outperforms force-directed layouts for the identification
of the largest cluster in the graph. Also, Abdelaal et al. [1] compare
force-directed layouts generated by _d3-force_, to a bipartite layout placing nodes along two (orderable) parallel axes with links in between
them and a matrix visualization. They assess user performance for
five tasks, including a cluster perception task, on graphs as large as
500 nodes. The bipartite layouts and the matrices were ordered using
an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm. For the cluster
perception task, they report no significant difference between matrices
and force-directed layouts, whereas bipartite layouts are much worse.
While in prior studies the overall graph density is considered as a
factor affecting user performance, this study aims to determine to what
extent cluster perception is affected by link probability between clusters
and within clusters, across various network sizes and visualization
types, including three state-of-the-art force-directed layouts, i.e.,

this end, we generated 60 different graph structures with a controlled
within- and between-cluster probability (two levels: ‘ _low_ ’ and ‘ _high_ ’
for both probabilities), a controlled number of clusters _k ∈_ [3 _.._ 7] of
variable sizes, and a controlled network size in terms of number of
nodes (50, 100 and 300 nodes). Also, we assess the impact of the
node ordering method (CR and OLO) on the performance of orderable
layouts compared to the three force-directed node-link layouts. While
Linlog is close to the optimum in translating mathematical clusters into
a visual clustering [66], the interplay between within- and betweencluster probability seems underexplored in network visualization. This
focus on graph cluster compactness and separability is inspired by
cluster validity indices [3, 23, 77] used in pattern mining research.
Finally, our study is purely perceptual to evaluate the layouts in their
own right, as navigation interactions may add more factors to control.


**3** **METHODS**


In this section, we describe the key parameters we control to generate
the set of stimuli used in this user study. We also present our hypotheses
and their motivation, as well as the study design and procedure.


**3.1** **The Visual Stimuli**


Network Size In this study, we generated synthetic data to better
control key network parameters. Compared to previous work surveyed
by Yoghourdjian et al. [90] where most studies use graphs with less
than 100 nodes, our study considers 50-, 100- and 300-node graphs.
By doing so, we aim to study both small and larger networks, without
the need to use interaction techniques. We also use large networks to
reduce the impact of random fluctuations during data generation.


Number of clusters and cluster size Since in real networks
clusters may vary in size, we use the Gaussian random partition graph
generator [16] of NetworkX [38] to create networks with _k ∈_ [3 _.._ 7]
clusters, each drawn from a normal distribution with a mean cluster
size and variance of cluster size distribution. We did not go beyond
seven clusters because counting the clusters might become tedious
without adding insights concerning cluster perception.


Cluster compactness and separability We set the within- and
between-cluster link probability, _pin_ and _pout_ respectively, to control
cluster compactness and separability. A high value of _pin_ corresponds
to _compact_ clusters, while a low value leads to _loose_ clusters. Likewise,
a high _pout_ creates relatively many links between clusters, i.e., poor
cluster separation, whereas a low _pout_ leads to better cluster separation.
To keep the duration of user sessions under one hour, we consider two
cluster compactness profiles _pin ∈{low_ = 0 _._ 3 _,_ _high_ = 0 _._ 6 _}_ and two


Fig. 2: The four quandrants of cluster types.


cluster separability profiles _pout ∈{low_ = 0 _._ 3 _,_ _high_ = 0 _._ 6 _}_ as shown in
Figure 2. In the rest of this paper, we will refer to clusters as _separable_
in the low _pout_ condition, and as _inseparable_ for high _pout_ . Also, we
describe clusters as _compact_ if they result from high _pin_, and _loose_ otherwise. For each network size, we generate four graph structures, one
in each quadrant. We use the following icons to denote these quadrants:


An important concern regarding cluster compactness and separability
is to choose the so-called ‘low’ and ‘high’ values for _pin_ and _pout_ such
that the obtained graph clusters are meaningful. Determining the absolute upper and lower bounds beyond which clusters cease to exist is
beyond the scope of this study.
A pragmatic validation measure to ensure the clustering tendency of
the generated graphs consisted in visually inspecting the corresponding
adjacency matrices to verify the presence of characteristic diagonal
blocks. The rows and columns of the matrix were ordered according the
original node order provided by the graph generator. In essence, such
a visual approach to assess clustering tendency is tantamount to the
VAT method and its many variants [52] which also look for diagonal
blocks in matrices, albeit originally for multivariate data in general.
This approach also leverages prior knowledge about the effectiveness
of matrix visualizations in showing clusters, subject to vertex seriation.
Figure 3 shows such matrices for the 50 node-graphs for all four cluster
type conditions, retaining the original node order provided by the graph
generator. Clustering tendency is at stake in the top three rows, where
clusters are loose and/or inseparable. Yet, we can see the right number
of diagonal blocks in all cases, the signal being admittedly faint in the
top left case.


Visualization types and settings Meidiana et al. [60] showed
that Linlog is the best for cluster detection. Also, Jacomy et al. [46]
argue that Force Atlas2 with Linlog energy is faster and leads to a better
cluster definition than other layouts like Fruchterman-Reingold [31],
Yifan-Hu and Force Atlas2 without Linlog energy. We study Linlog,
Backbone and sfdp, three performant layouts from the study of Meidiana et al. We generated the Linlog layouts using Gephi [7] v. 0.10.1
based on its implementation of the Forceatlas2 algorithm with Linlog [64] mode on, and with the node overlap prevention mode on. We
increased the edge width in these diagrams to improve link visibility. The Backbone layout was generated using VisOne v. 2.26, with
backbone type = ‘Quadrilateral Simmelian’ (recommended in [69]),
backbone strength type = ‘redundancy’ and compared edge = ‘true’.
The sfdp layouts came from Graphviz v. 2.43.0 with the default parameters. We also implemented three types of orderable node-link layouts in

graph, we applied two node ordering methods: the crossing reduction
method from Reorderjs [30] v. 2.2.4, i.e., the barycenter heuristic [57],
and the optimal leaf ordering method [6] with average linkage and
Jaccard distance from scipy v. 1.11.4. We also generated the stimuli
corresponding to the original node order provided by the graph generator (denoted as GEN hereafter). Finally, each stimulus is saved as
an SVG image which is scaled to occupy all the available canvas, with
no possible user interaction. To reduce digital eyestrain due to screen
brightness [89], the stimuli were rendered with white semi-transparent
links (and blue nodes) on a black background (as in Figure 6), whereas
most images in this paper use the reverse encoding to save ink. All
stimuli are provided in supplemental material. Digital eyestrain is yet a
complex phenomenon for which we still lack definitive guidelines.


3


_k_ = 3 _k_ = 4 _k_ = 5 _k_ = 6 _k_ = 7


Fig. 3: Visual assessment of clustering tendency based on the adjacency matrix of the 50-node graphs in their original node order.


**3.2** **Hypotheses**


Below, we list our hypotheses about the visual saliency of clusters
in orderable and force-directed node-link layouts across the cluster
compactness and separability quadrants. Given the known ground truth
of the graph generation process, we use the users’ ability to count
clusters as a proxy of cluster visual saliency. We use the same accuracy
score as Okoe et al. [70], defined as: _Acc_ = _max_ (0 _,_ 1 _−_ _[∥][PA]_ _∥TA_ _[−][TA]_ _∥_ _[∥]_ ), where

PA stands for participant answer and TA for the true answer.

- **H1** Graph clusters are more salient visually in orderable layouts

compared to force-directed layouts, for all combinations of

clusters, which is the ideal scenario for force-directed layouts.

_Rationale:_ Prior studies [42, 68, 70] on various cluster perception tasks
suggest that ordered matrices improve the visual saliency of clusters
(which appear as dense blocks of links). We expect that node ordering in

high link concentrations easing cluster perception, as in Figure 1.

- **H2** Graph clusters are more salient visually in orderable node-link
diagrams ordered by the optimal leaf ordering method (OLO) than the
layouts ordered by the crossing reduction method (CR).

_Rationale:_ Based on the study by Behrisch et al. [11], OLO [6] which
is a clustering based method is preferable for cluster perception tasks
to other types of ordering methods, in this case CR [57]. In a sense, the
visual saliency of clusters resulting from CR is an indirect product of
reducing link crossings in a network. A good example of CR’s ability to
reveal clusters is provided in Figure 5. Yet, OLO is designed to reveal
clusters, and should consistently surpass CR for cluster perception.

- **H3** Graph clusters are more salient visually in symmetric arc diagrams than in plain arc diagrams .

_Rationale:_ According to the Gestalt principles, the elements of symmetric components tend to be seen as belonging together [48]. Also, symmetry preservation is a known aesthetic rule in graph drawing [8, 18].


Hence, the round disc-shaped clusters in symmetric arc layouts might
improve cluster perception as opposed to half discs in plain arc layouts.


**3.3** **Study Design**

This user study combines between-subject and within-subject designs.
We adopted a between-subject approach at the level of network size.
That is, participants were exposed to a single network size only throughout their session. Within a session, we adopted a within subject approach where we varied all other factors as detailed in Section 3.4.
We ran three pilot tests with a few users each to troubleshoot any
usability issues and validate our data collection procedure, our estimation of task completion time and the total duration of each participant
session. We aimed to keep the total session duration under one hour.
We used Prolific to recruit English-speaking online participants,
equipped with a laptop or desktop computer. Like in similar user
studies [1, 70], we aimed for 40 to 50 participants for each condition.
In total, we recruited _n_ = 139 participants, mainly between the ages
of 18 and 34 (64%); the remaining 36% were above 35. Among them,
57.24% declared to be males, 44.27% females and the rest (0.76)% did
not declare their gender. Most participants were geographically located
in the UK(27%), South Africa (17%), the USA (9%) and Portugal (9%).


**3.4** **Study Procedure**

After signing the informed consent form, each participant was trained
on scribbling on a drawing canvas using their mouse. This was needed
later in the procedure to validate their understanding of the cluster
identification task. Figure 4 gives an overview of the study procedure.
All participants were exposed to the four visualization types

in a random sequence. For each visualization type, participants
went through the following steps:

1. _Training._ They watched a one-minute video explaining how to read
the visualization, based on a social network scenario, presenting
nodes as people, edges as friendship relationships, and clusters
as friendship groups. The video showed a 51-node extract of the


4


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


|1 Graph Size|Col2|
|---|---|
|in {50, 100, 300}<br>(random)||


Fig. 4: Flowchart of the study procedure. Credit: video icon by Ilham Fitrotul Hayat from Noun Project (CC BY 3.0).


character co-occurrence network in _Les Misérables_ novel [47] with
distinct clusters (see Figure 5). The network construction was
animated to ease comprehension. Users could replay the video.
Then, they took a training based on two sample networks: the
extract of _Les Misérables_ again and the AUCS network [76]. They
chose the cluster count among multiple choices between 1 and 8.
The correct answer was displayed as an image with an overlay
outline of the individual clusters to teach them the visual signature
of clusters in the visual metaphor at hand.


2. _Counting Task._ For each visualization type, participants saw 60
stimuli in random order (4 cluster types _×_ 5 cluster count values _×_ 3
variants). The variants correspond either to the three node orderings
(GEN, OLO, CR), if applicable, or the three force-directed layouts
(Linlog, Backbone, sfdp).


For each stimulus, users had to count the friendship groups and to
choose the right answer between [1 _.._ 8] (for ground truth _k ∈_ [3 _.._ 7]).
This task is used to test all three hypotheses.


3. _Drawing Task._ Finally, users drew an outline around clusters in the
100-node stimuli having four compact and separable clusters (those
in Figure 6). As we did not have direct access to online participants,
we needed concrete evidence that they individually understood the
task. This might be used typically to exclude anomalous participants,
which was not the case here.

After an optional 2-minute break, participants moved on to the next
visualization type and repeated the same steps.
Hence, all participants saw 240 stimuli in total (4 visualization types
_×_ 60 stimuli). We used Mephisto [81] to create and deploy the study,
and collect data. For each stimulus, we recorded the cluster count and
the response times.


**4** **RESULTS**


In Figure 6, we overlay all the cluster outlines drawn by all study
participants in the cluster drawing task, for network size 100. It shows
that for all four layouts, participants had a good understanding of what
a cluster looked like. For this task, we deliberately chose easy stimuli

complicated our assessment of whether participants understood the task.
This doubt being cleared, we can proceed with the analysis of results.
The Anderson-Darling test [2] showed that accuracy and task completion time are not normally distributed.
Hence, we performed a one-tailed Kruskal-Wallis test and Bonferroni correction to determine whether the observed differences were
statistically significant, with a corrected threshold of _p_ = 0 _._ 05. We
discarded one single user who systematically answered 1 or 8 clusters
(the two extreme options).


**4.1** **Preliminary Remarks**


Regarding force-directed layouts (see Figure 7), users counted clusters
faster and less accurately with sfdp than with Linlog and Backbone for
all combinations of cluster compactness and separability. Linlog leads
to consistently faster cluster count judgements than Backbone, while
being statistically significantly more accurate for compact separable
clusters and on par for other cluster types. Hence, all plots in this
section use Linlog as a baseline for comparison with orderable layouts.


In the rest of this section, all figures provided to verify the various
hypotheses always include a pair of plots, see Figure 8 for example.
On the left, a boxplot comparing the distribution of accuracy in all four

. On the right, a matrix visualization shows the p-values of
all pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction applied across all
16 combinations of layout type and cluster type. Dark cells correspond
to statistically significant differences ( _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05). We focus on the four
4 _×_ 4 diagonal blocks, outlined in red in the matrix, corresponding to
the quadrants. In the interest of space, the plots corresponding to task
completion time are provided in supplemental material, as well as plots
comparing Backbone or sfdp baselines to orderable layouts.


**4.2** **Hypothesis H1 (** ✓ **): Orderable Node-Link Layouts Im-**
**prove Cluster Saliency Over Linlog Layouts**

Figure 8 shows that we can confirm H1 for loose and/or inseparable

nodes are placed in the same order they were generated. In these three
cluster settings, participants using the three orderable layouts
achieve 100% median accuracy on cluster count judgements, whereas
Linlog lags significantly behind at 67% to 80%. Besides the 33%
median accuracy gains, the orderable layouts achieve a median time up
to 2 seconds (25%) shorter than Linlog (see supplemental material).

layouts are equally excellent (median accuracy of 100% with

but a slightly higher variance. In passing, Backbone and sfdp lag

The situation is more nuanced regarding user performance with the
CR and OLO ordering methods. With CR (see Figure 9),

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


Linlog wins, although all layouts achieve 100% median accuracy. The

pants are consistently statistically significantly slower with CR-ordered

and sfdp, users are less accurate than with CR-ordered layouts in all
four quadrants (see supplemental Figure 20 and Figure 26).
In Figure 10,

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


**4.3** **Hypothesis H2 (** ✗ **): OLO Beats CR at Cluster Saliency**

H2 does not hold. Figure 11 and Figure 12 show that CR is equivalent
to OLO in most cluster settings, except for arc layouts in the case

where CR is better. Both CR and OLO are behind GEN, the originally
generated node order, by much, across all four quadrants.


**4.4** **Hypothesis H3 (** ✗ **):** **Beats** **at Cluster Saliency**

H3 does not hold. There is no statistically significant difference between
arc and symmetric arc layouts, for any cluster type, neither


5


(a) Symmetric arc layout, OLO (b) Symmetric arc layout, CR (c) Radial layout, OLO (d) Radial layout, CR


(e) Linlog layout (f) Backbone layout (g) sfdp layout


Fig. 5: A 51-node extract from the co-occurrence network of the characters of _Les Misérables_, the novel of Victor Hugo.


(a) Linlog layout (b) Arc layout (c) Symmetric arc layout (d) Radial layout


Fig. 6: The 100-node network used in the drawing task. The cluster outlines show that the users understood the cluster identification task.


in terms of accuracy (see Figure 8 and Figure 9), nor in terms of task
completion time (see supplemental Figure 13 and Figure 14).


**4.5** **Additional Findings**


Network size affects force-directed layouts Besides our hypotheses, we found that the accuracy of all three force-directed layouts

decreases as network size increases (see Table 1 in supplemental
material). The impact of network size on cluster count in orderable


Global patterns vs. local patterns. In Figure 6, the superposition
of cluster outlines drawn by the study participants reveals where they
have more often identified clusters.
While there were four clusters in the ground truth for this particular
graph, the participants counted five clusters based on Linlog, four

might promote local structures. This mere assumption requires
experimental validation.


**5** **DISCUSSION**


Based on our results, we discuss the performance of orderable layouts at
cluster detection, the limitations of this study and formulate guidelines
for the use of orderable layouts.


**5.1** **Cluster Detection in Orderable Layouts**


In this study, we compared three orderable node-link layouts

to three force-directed node-link layouts, Linlog, Backbone and
sfdp. Our empirical results confirm previous findings that Linlog and


Backbone outperform sfdp for the cluster perception task, and that
Linlog is better or equivalent to Backbone [60].
Consistently with prior work on cluster perception in matrix visualizations [41, 42, 68, 70], our results also show that the performance
of orderable layouts at the cluster detection task depends on the seriation method. We extend this knowledge to understudied orderable
node-link layouts and provide an empirical validation across the cluster
compactness and separability quadrants. In our study, the original node
order (GEN) resulting from the graph generator leads to a much more
accurate and faster cluster count judgement than the node orders given
by CR and OLO (with Jaccard distance and average linkage). In a sense,
GEN is a very good reflection of the known ground truth. Both CR and
OLO achieve a high median accuracy from 75% to 85% for the hardest,

accuracy of 100%, with a statistically significant edge for CR which has
a smaller variance than OLO. In the absence of a known ground truth,
CR is hence an excellent seriation method for visual cluster detection.
Our results also show that, subject to a suitable node ordering, or
force-directed node-link layout, for the cluster identification task, in

GEN-ordered, CR-ordered and OLO-ordered orderable layouts (see
Figure 8, Figure 9 and Figure 10). Users achieve very high accuracies
with the GEN ordering of nodes, with median accuracy scores of 100%
in all quadrants, up to 33% better than Linlog. These new findings

suitable node ordering method can complement the analyst’s toolbox
for cluster identification beyond the pristine case of compact separable


6


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


node-link layouts and the Linlog layout achieve 100% median accuracy
for the cluster identification task, while the orderable layouts are better
for the more challenging cluster types (see Figure 9).
Based on the computational benchmark of Behrisch et al. [11] for
adjacency matrices, cluster perception is well served if the ordering
method is based on a clustering approach. This is confirmed empirically

OLO achieve between 70% and 85% median accuracy (Figure 12).
As long as the analyst needs to identify clusters in an overview
visualization, any clustering-based order applied to nodes will induce

among other aspects, clusters may vary in shape, size, number and
density, different clustering methods will lead to more or less useful
node orders/overview visualizations. Similarly, different force-directed
approaches lead to more or less useful layouts. In our study, CR, a
seriation method not based on clustering, did better than OLO, which
is based on agglomerative hierarchical clustering, with respect to arc

possible explanation is that the Jaccard distance employed by OLO in
this experiment did not cope well with the many between-cluster links,
while the objective to reduce edge-crossings of CR is less sensitive to
this type of noise.
Besides the global patterns revealed by clustering-based seriation
methods, some of these methods can also optimize for more local patterns, e.g., OLO optimizes node order locally. Local optimization might
address gaps identified by Noack, such as promoting the perception of
missing details concerning the internal structure of clusters and relationships between clusters. Also, the different link shapes (arcs, symmetric
arcs, straight lines) and node positions inherent to each layout seem to
have different effects on the perception of (sub-)clusters, as shown by
the annotated cluster areas in Figure 6.
A formal validation is still needed for such sub-cluster level tasks,
though.
Earlier user studies by Okoe et al. [70] and Nobre et al. [68] found
that ordered adjacency matrices outperform force-directed layouts, for
cluster identification. We introduce a new possibility, consisting in

the size of our experiment manageable, and the duration of participant
sessions reasonable, we left adjacency matrices out of the scope of
this study. Now that it has become clear that orderable layouts

can outperform by much some of the best force-directed nodelink layouts, subject to a suitable node order, a future user study
could compare them to similarly ordered matrices in terms of cluster
perception and explore a larger number of ordering methods. Yet,
adjacency matrices rely on a visual metaphor deemed unfamiliar by
most users who often prefer node-link diagrams [34]. The path
finding task is also challenging with matrix visualizations, due to the
duplication of nodes on the sides of the matrix. Whether this task is

the node-link metaphor is an open question. In general, more work is


Fig. 7: Cluster count accuracy (top) and completion time (bottom) for
sizes=all, clusters=all, layouts={Linlog, Backbone, sfdp }.


determine which other graph analysis tasks they can effectively support.
For the cluster detection task, Abdelaal et al. [1] found that bipartite
diagrams ordered according to agglomerative hierarchical clustering
perform worse than force-directed node-link layouts and matrices, especially for sparse networks. Unlike previous work by Okoe et al. [70]
and Nobre et al. [68], Abdelaal et al. [1] did not report any statistically
significant difference in terms of cluster perception between matrices
and node-link layouts generated by neato [29] (layout based on multidimensional scaling). Such a disagreement between different studies
may usually be explained by differences in the experimental protocol.
This points to the importance of replication studies in the visualization
field, and the necessity to share openly as much information as possible,
including training materials, data sets etc. Towards this, we release in
supplementary material all the stimuli used in this user study, along
with the corresponding graph data sets, and the training material.
From a visual perception perspective, the saliency of clusters in forcedirected node-link layouts, e.g., Linlog, exploits two principles:
the Gestalt proximity principle entailing that nodes whose position is
close in the 2D plane tend to be seen as a cluster, and the difference
in luminosity induced by the locally high edge clutter within clusters
in contrast to the rather sparse link connectivity elsewhere, especially
in many real network data sets. In this experiment, we did our best to
enhance the readability of the stimuli resulting from Linlog, for
example, by increasing node size and link thickness in the larger 300node networks to compensate for the zoom out effect resulting from
fitting a larger drawing in a fixed-size display and, hence, to ensure a
good readability. In contrast, our study used a basic implementation

characterized by edge concentrations only. Orderable layouts
could be further enhanced by exploiting the Gestalt proximity principle
too, i.e., by introducing gaps between clusters along the underlying
geometric locus, when the clusters are known. We expect such gaps to

which is supported by a prior qualitative study on graph layouts based
on space-filling curves [61]. One might also study the effect of edge
bundling on the cluster identification task. Edge bundling has initially
been applied on radial diagrams, given an overarching hierarchy [44]. It
has later been extended to preserve the perception of paths [85]. Since
edge bundling affects drastically the way edges are routed, and the
overall edge clutter, it might as well impact cluster perception. While
prior work has explored edge bundling for radial graphs and general 2D
graph layouts, work on edge bundling for arc diagrams is scarce. The
results of this study constitute a stepping stone in this direction, and a
baseline against which future work could compare cluster perception
for both edge-bundled orderable and force-directed node-link layouts.

relatively inefficient use of display space. Indeed, minimizing the
area of the drawing is a known graph drawing aesthetic rule [8]. In
this respect, vanilla arc diagrams obviously use half the area of
their symmetric variant, but much more than the equivalent radial


integrating orderable layouts in a broader context, for example in a
multiple coordinated view setting with other visualizations. On the one
hand, arc diagrams can be easily displayed on the side of a matrix
view, like in MatLink [42]. But, in any case, their nodes may need to
be scaled up to ensure sufficient visibility. In this study, we scaled the
different layouts to use all the available display area, and ensured a
good visibility of the nodes and links in all layouts (see Section 3.1).


**5.2** **Limitations**


Data generation Much research has gone into generating synthetic graphs meeting certain requirements, e.g., structural patterns
characterized by common graph metrics such as degree distribution, or
clustering coefficient [13]. The use of synthetic graphs is of practical
value for large-scale benchmarking activities, for which it is difficult
to gather enough real graph data sets with comparable features, and
also to be able to control the key properties of graphs for a specific


7


Fig. 8: Cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = GEN**, baseline = Linlog. The dark matrix cells correspond to _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05.


Fig. 9: Cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = CR**, baseline = Linlog. The dark matrix cells correspond to _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05


investigation. Also, similar to Anscombe’s quartet, previous work by
Chen et al. has shown that very different graphs might share the same
summary statistics [20]. So, even when researchers use popular graph
generators, it is difficult in practice to control for everything, and there
is a large overhead associated with the preparation of graph data sets.
In this study, we used the Gaussian random partition graph generator [16] of NetworkX [38], to control the number of nodes, the number
of clusters and the internal and external link probabilities of these clusters. We wanted to have small and large clusters in the same network,
to better mimic real networks. Still, one limitation of our approach is

real graphs, a mix of compact and loose clusters exist, with more or
less coupling between them. An alternate data generation approach
could consist in creating the clusters separately with the desired mix of
inner link densities and cluster sizes, before injecting external links, as
needed. Yet, our experiment provides a good complement to existing
work on cluster perception, and a baseline for future inquiries.


Cluster validity When generating graphs with loose and/or inseparable clusters, given the stochastic nature of the generative process


some clusters may be so loose and inseparable not to qualify as clusters. One would ideally have a measure of the clustering tendency of
the generated data, and only keep graphs with a sufficient clustering
tendency. This is however a complex task. Global measures associated
to the presence of clusters, such as clustering coefficient or maximum
modularity, are convenient, but they cannot tell whether individual
clusters are too loose or inseparable. Also, maximum modularity can
be very high even in random networks [36], a problem shared with
other descriptive methods for cluster detection [72].
A principled way to assess clustering tendency would be to compute
statistical significance [53], which is also a complex task with strong
assumptions. First, some work proposing significance testing for clustering focus on the whole set of clusters, e.g., [91], where individual
non-significant clusters might occur within significant clusterings [72].
Recent work explores how to test individual clusters [71], but there is
no standard way of doing it yet, and these methods rely themselves
on assumptions such as the null model against which statistical significance is computed. Since different cluster types may exist, and different
clustering methods are based on different definitions of what a cluster
is, we conclude that clustering tendency should rather be considered


8


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


Fig. 10: Cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = OLO**, baseline = Linlog. The dark matrix cells correspond to _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05


Fig. 11: Cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, **clusters = loose**, orders = { GEN, CR, OLO }. The dark matrix cells correspond to _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05


while interpreting the results of the empirical study, rather than as a
hard filter to decide which stimuli should be included in the study. In
particular, if for some stimuli the participants fail to identify clusters for
all the tested layout methods, an explanation may be that those clusters
are too loose and inseparable to even qualify as clusters. If the correct
number of clusters is consistently identified using one method, it seems
reasonable to consider this as empirical evidence that the generated
clusters are valid. As this paper aims to compare different layouts,
and not to study the level of compactness/separability where specific
methods start failing, this evidence suffices to reach our conclusions.


Like in Figure 3, we used matrix visualizations to check the existence
of clusters in every generated graph. Future work may seek to determine
the frontiers of the cluster validity space empirically by generating many
graphs with decreasing cluster compactness and/or separability until
users cease to catch a signal in the stimuli. Such a principled approach
would provide useful insights, to guide graph generation for similar
studies on cluster perception. In this study, we have seen that GEN, the
node generation order, leads to significantly faster and more accurate
cluster count judgements, than OLO and CR. This may occur when
the clusters are generated one after the other. The 20% accuracy gap


between GEN and OLO/CR calls for more adapted clustering methods
for the relatively loose and/or inseparable clusters considered here.


Layout optimization Since the output of most graph layout algorithms depends on hyperparameter values, researchers should strive to
evaluate algorithms at their best. For example, a computational study
might seek to find the optimal hyperparameter values to refine each of
the three force-directed layouts for each of the 60 graphs included in
our study. This would yet require establishing which aesthetic rules
best capture cluster saliency, which is an open question. In this study,
we have relied on published best practice, e.g., the use of _quadrilat-_
_eral Simmelian_ Backbone, and the fact that default settings are usually
chosen to give good results in general. Lastly, OLO and CR are both
linear seriation methods, which may be suboptimal for radial layouts

. Future work may consider circular seriation methods too [4].


Crowdsourcing One benefit of crowdsourced studies is the access
to a large and diverse participant sample. While the researcher has
limited control over the setup, e.g., software, hardware and ergonomic
aspects, we selected participants with a suitable display size: laptops
and desktop monitors, excluding all handheld devices. The high levels


9


Fig. 12: Cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, **clusters = compact**, orders = { GEN, CR, OLO }. The dark matrix cells correspond to _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05


of accuracy, and short task completion times, achieved by the study
participants make us believe that the experimental setting was suitable.
We were also keen to ensure that the participants understood the task
at hand, without being able to observe them directly. To mitigate any
issues, we had several iterations over the training material to make
the video tutorials as clear and as short as possible, prior to the study.
Ultimately, the short drawing task at the end of each stimulus batch,
i.e., for each visualization type, allowed us, post hoc, to quality control
and check for any major misunderstanding of the task.


**5.3** **Guidelines**


Our study compared three force-directed layouts (ForceAtlas2 with
Linlog energy, Backbone and sfdp) to three orderable layouts
in terms of cluster perception in graphs having four different types of

depending on cluster type, certain visualizations outperform others.
Hence, we can formulate the following guidelines:


- **G1** When node clusters are of analytical interest, use an orderable
node-link layout to get an overview of the cluster structure. **Obser-**

layout may lead to a wrong perception of the cluster structure.

- **G2** Check the agreement between force-directed and orderable nodelink layouts. **Observation:** When the graph has ideal clusters, i.e.,

of clusters. Therefore, if force-directed and orderable node-link layouts
show the same cluster structure, the choice of visualization can then be
based on additional tasks to be addressed.

- **G3** When an orderable node-link diagram is chosen as a visualization,
use CR or OLO. **Observation:** Both CR and OLO seriation algorithms
achieve good results in terms of cluster identification.

These guidelines are valid within the experimental conditions used
in our study. While our results cannot be generalized to all layout
algorithms under all choices of hyperparameters, the force-directed
layouts we used were informed by the literature and are commonly
used. We also note that each of our stimuli only contains a single type
of clusters, so that we could use this as an independent variable. While
we cannot generalize our results to cases with different types of clusters
in the same graph, we believe that observations about specific cluster
types will still apply to these cases.


**6** **CONCLUSION**

Clusters are common and important network patterns. We presented
the first user study investigating the visual saliency of graph clusters in orderable node-link layouts under varying conditions of cluster
compactness and separability. We found empirically that the use of

ing algorithm achieves fast and accurate cluster detection, surpassing
significantly several force-directed layouts (Linlog, Backbone and

node-link layout is on par with or better than orderable node-links

the barycenter heuristic) outperforms the optimal leaf ordering seriation

Future perceptual studies might explore other graph motifs, e.g.,
hubs, and other tasks like path finding to better understand the pros

extend the study to include synthetic data sets with overlapping clusters,
and real data sets with application-driven analytical goals. Finally, one
might investigate why the orderable layouts are good at showing clusters. The rationale for H1 is that these layouts create locally high link
concentrations. Insights into the specific features associated to better
cluster perception with orderable layouts may lead to new methods,
e.g., to quantify layout quality for this task automatically.


**SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS**

All supplemental materials are available on OSF at `[https://osf.io/](https://osf.io/kc3dg/)`
`[kc3dg/](https://osf.io/kc3dg/)`, released under a CC BY 4.0 license. In particular, they include


1. A zip file containing **I) the material used to train study partic-**
**ipants** (video tutorials and training data sets). **II) The stimuli**
used in the user study in various formats (SVG, PDF), and **III) All**
**graph data sets** in GraphML format to support study replication.


2. Additional statistics including I) a comparison of cluster count
completion time between the Linlog layout and orderable layouts (accuracy is already analyzed above), II) a comparison of
completion time between all orderable layouts across all cluster
types, III) a comparison of the accuracy and completion time of
backbone, respectively sfdp, to orderable layouts.


**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

The authors wish to thank Helen Purchase for her valuable advice about
the experimental setup. This work was supported in part by a grant
from Luxembourg FNR (# INTER/ANR/20/14956115).


10


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


**REFERENCES**


[1] M. Abdelaal, N. D. Schiele, K. Angerbauer, K. Kurzhals, M. Sedlmair, and
D. Weiskopf. Comparative evaluation of bipartite, node-link, and matrixbased network representations. _IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput. Graphics_,
[29(1):896–906, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3209427 2, 3, 4, 7](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2022.3209427)

[2] T. W. Anderson and D. A. Darling. A test of goodness of fit. _J. Am. Stat._
_Assoc._ [, 49(268):765–769, 1954. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1954.10501232 5](https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1954.10501232)

[3] O. Arbelaitz, I. Gurrutxaga, J. Muguerza, J. M. Pérez, and I. Perona. An extensive comparative study of cluster validity indices. _Pattern Recognition_,
[46(1):243–256, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2012.07.021 3](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2012.07.021)

[4] S. Armstrong, C. Guzmán, and C. A. Sing Long. An optimal algorithm for
strict circular seriation. _SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science_,
[3(4):1223–1250, 2021. doi: 10.1137/21M139356X 9](https://doi.org/10.1137/21M139356X)

[5] A. S. Asratian, T. M. Denley, and R. Häggkvist. _Bipartite graphs and their_
_applications_ [, vol. 131. CUP, 1998. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511984068 2](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511984068)

[6] Z. Bar-Joseph, D. K. Gifford, and T. S. Jaakkola. Fast optimal leaf ordering
for hierarchical clustering . _Bioinformatics_, 17(suppl_1):S22–S29, 2001.
[doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/17.suppl_1.S22 2, 3, 4](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/17.suppl_1.S22)

[7] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy. Gephi: An open source software
for exploring and manipulating networks. _Proc. Int. AAAI Conf. Web_
_Social Media_ [, 3(1):361–362, 2009. doi: 10.1609/icwsm.v3i1.13937 3](https://doi.org/10.1609/icwsm.v3i1.13937)

[8] G. D. Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. G. Tollis. _Graph Drawing:_
_Algorithms for the Visualization of Graphs_ . Prentice Hall PTR, USA, 1st
ed., 1998. 2, 4, 7

[9] F. Beck, M. Burch, S. Diehl, and D. Weiskopf. A taxonomy and survey of
dynamic graph visualization. _Computer Graphics Forum_, 36(1):133–159,
[2017. doi: 10.1111/cgf.12791 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12791)

[10] P. Bedi and C. Sharma. Community detection in social networks. _Wiley_
_interdisciplinary reviews: Data mining and knowledge discovery_, 6(3):115–
[135, 2016. doi: 10.1002/widm.1178 1](https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1178)

[11] M. Behrisch, B. Bach, N. Henry Riche, T. Schreck, and J.-D. Fekete.
Matrix reordering methods for table and network visualization. _Computer_
_Graphics Forum_ [, 35(3):693–716, 2016. doi: 10.1111/cgf.12935 1, 2, 4, 7](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12935)

[12] J. Bertin. _Semiology of graphics: Diagrams, networks, and maps._ University of Wisconsin Press., 1983. 1

[13] A. Bonifati, I. Holubová, A. Prat-Pérez, and S. Sakr. Graph generators:
State of the art and open challenges. _ACM Computing Surveys_, 53(2),
[article no. 36, 30 pages, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3379445 7](https://doi.org/10.1145/3379445)

[14] R. Bonneau. Learning biological networks: from modules to dynamics.
_Nat. Chem. Biol._ [, 4(11):658–664, 2008. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.122 1](https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.122)

[15] I. Borg and J. Lingoes. _Multidimensional similarity structure analysis_ .
[Springer, New York, 2012. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-4768-5 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4768-5)

[16] U. Brandes, M. Gaertler, and D. Wagner. Experiments on graph clustering
algorithms. In _Proc. ESA_ [, pp. 568–579. Springer Berlin, 2003. doi: 10.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-39658-1_52)
[1007/978-3-540-39658-1_52 3, 8](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-39658-1_52)

[17] U. Brandes and C. Pich. Eigensolver methods for progressive multidimensional scaling of large data. In _Proc. GD_ [, pp. 42–53. Springer, 2006. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70904-6_6)
[10.1007/978-3-540-70904-6_6 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70904-6_6)

[18] M. Burch, W. Huang, M. Wakefield, H. C. Purchase, D. Weiskopf, and
J. Hua. The state of the art in empirical user evaluation of graph visualizations. _IEEE Access_ [, 9:4173–4198, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3047616](https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3047616)
4

[19] C.-H. Chen. Generalized association plots: Information visualization via
iteratively generated correlation matrices. _Statistica Sinica_, pp. 7–29, 2002.
2

[20] H. Chen, U. Soni, Y. Lu, R. Maciejewski, and S. Kobourov. Same stats,
different graphs. In _Proc. GD_ [, pp. 463–477. Springer, Cham, 2018. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04414-5_33)
[10.1007/978-3-030-04414-5_33 8](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04414-5_33)

[21] K.-T. Chen, T. Dwyer, B. Bach, and K. Marriott. It’s a wrap: Toroidal
wrapping of network visualisations supports cluster understanding tasks.
In _Proc. CHI_ [, pp. 1–12, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445439 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445439)

[22] Y. Cheng and G. Church. Biclustering of expression data. In _Proc. ISMB_,
vol. 8, pp. 93–103, 2000. 2

[23] D. L. Davies and D. W. Bouldin. A cluster separation measure. _IEEE Trans-_
_actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence_, PAMI-1(2):224–
[227, 1979. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909 3](https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909)

[24] S. Di Bartolomeo, T. Crnovrsanin, D. Saffo, E. Puerta, C. Wilson, and
C. Dunne. Evaluating graph layout algorithms: A systematic review of
methods and best practices. _Computer Graphics Forum_, n/a(n/a):e15073.
[doi: 10.1111/cgf.15073 3](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.15073)

[25] J. Díaz, J. Petit, and M. Serna. A survey of graph layout problems. _ACM_
_Comput. Surv._ [, 34(3):313–356, 2002. doi: 10.1145/568522.568523 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/568522.568523)


11


[26] G. M. Draper, Y. Livnat, and R. F. Riesenfeld. A survey of radial methods
for information visualization. _IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput. Graphics_,
[15(5):759–776, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2009.23 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2009.23)

[27] T. Dwyer and Y. Koren. Dig-CoLa: directed graph layout through constrained energy minimization. In _Proc. IEEE INFOVIS_, pp. 65–72, 2005.
[doi: 10.1109/INFVIS.2005.1532130 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/INFVIS.2005.1532130)

[28] T. Dwyer, K. Marriott, and M. Wybrow. Dunnart: A constraint-based
network diagram authoring tool. In _Proc. GD_, pp. 420–431. Springer,
[Berlin, 2009. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-00219-9_41 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00219-9_41)

[29] J. Ellson, E. Gansner, L. Koutsofios, S. C. North, and G. Woodhull.
Graphviz— open source graph drawing tools. In _Proc. GD_, pp. 483–484.
[Springer, Berlin, 2002. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45848-4_57 2, 7](https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45848-4_57)

[30] J.-D. Fekete. Reorder.js: A JavaScript Library to Reorder Tables and
Networks. IEEE VIS 2015, 2015. Poster. 1, 2, 3

[31] T. M. J. Fruchterman and E. M. Reingold. Graph drawing by force-directed
placement. _Software: Practice and Experience_, 21(11):1129–1164, 1991.
[doi: 10.1002/spe.4380211102 2, 3](https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.4380211102)

[32] J. Fuchs, F. L. Dennig, M.-V. Heinle, D. A. Keim, and S. Di Bartolomeo.
Exploring the design space of BioFabric visualization for multivariate
network analysis. _Computer Graphics Forum_ [, 43(3):e15079, 2024. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.15079)
[10.1111/cgf.15079 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.15079)

[33] E. R. Gansner, Y. Koren, and S. North. Graph drawing by stress majorization. In _Proc. GD_ [, pp. 239–250. Springer, 2005. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-31843-9_25)
[-31843-9_25 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-31843-9_25)

[34] M. Ghoniem, J.-D. Fekete, and P. Castagliola. On the readability of graphs
using node-link and matrix-based representations: A controlled experiment
and statistical analysis. _Information Visualization_, 4(2):114–135, 2005.
[doi: 10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500092 1, 7](https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500092)

[35] H. Gibson, J. Faith, and P. Vickers. A survey of two-dimensional graph
layout techniques for information visualisation. _Information Visualization_,
[12(3-4):324–357, 2013. doi: 10.1177/1473871612455749 1, 2](https://doi.org/10.1177/1473871612455749)

[36] R. Guimerà, M. Sales-Pardo, and L. A. N. Amaral. Modularity from
fluctuations in random graphs and complex networks. _Physical Review E_,
[70(2):025101, 2004. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.70.025101 8](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.70.025101)

[37] S. Hachul and M. Jünger. Drawing large graphs with a potential-fieldbased multilevel algorithm. In _Proc. GD_, pp. 285–295. Springer, 2005.
[doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-31843-9_29 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-31843-9_29)

[38] A. A. Hagberg, D. A. Schult, and P. J. Swart. Exploring network structure,
dynamics, and function using NetworkX. In _Proc. Python in Science_
_Conference_, pp. 11–15. Pasadena, CA USA, 2008. 3, 8

[39] D. Harel and Y. Koren. Graph drawing by high-dimensional embedding.
In _Proc. GD_ [, pp. 207–219. Springer Berlin, 2002. doi: 10.1007/3-540-36151](https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36151-0_20)
[-0_20 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36151-0_20)

[40] J. Heer, M. Bostock, and V. Ogievetsky. A tour through the visualization
zoo. _Commun. ACM_ [, 53(6):59–67, 2010. doi: 10.1145/1794514.1805128 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/1794514.1805128)

[41] N. Henry and J.-d. Fekete. MatrixExplorer: a dual-representation system to explore social networks. _IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput. Graphics_,
[12(5):677–684, 2006. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2006.160 1, 6](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2006.160)

[42] N. Henry and J.-D. Fekete. MatLink: Enhanced matrix visualization for
analyzing social networks. In _Proc. INTERACT_, pp. 288–302. Springer
[Berlin, 2007. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-74800-7_24 3, 4, 6, 7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-74800-7_24)

[43] I. Herman, G. Melançon, and M. Marshall. Graph visualization and
navigation in information visualization: A survey. _IEEE Trans. Visual._
_Comput. Graphics_ [, 6(1):24–43, 2000. doi: 10.1109/2945.841119 1, 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/2945.841119)

[44] D. Holten. Hierarchical edge bundles: Visualization of adjacency relations
in hierarchical data. _IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer_
_Graphics_ [, 12(5):741–748, 2006. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2006.147 7](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2006.147)

[45] Y. Hu. Efficient, high-quality force-directed graph drawing. _Mathematica_
_journal_, 10(1):37–71, 2006. 2

[46] M. Jacomy, T. Venturini, S. Heymann, and M. Bastian. ForceAtlas2,
a continuous graph layout algorithm for handy network visualization
designed for the gephi software. _PloS one_ [, 9:e98679, 2014. doi: 10.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0098679)
[1371/journal.pone.0098679 3](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0098679)

[47] D. E. Knuth. _The Stanford GraphBase: A Platform for Combinatorial_
_Computing_ . Addison-Wesley, USA, 1993. 5

[48] S. G. Kobourov, T. Mchedlidze, and L. Vonessen. Gestalt principles in
graph drawing. In _Proc. GD_ [, pp. 558–560. Springer, Cham, 2015. doi: 10.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27261-0_50)
[1007/978-3-319-27261-0_50 1, 2, 4](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27261-0_50)

[49] Y. Koren, L. Carmel, and D. Harel. ACE: a fast multiscale eigenvectors
computation for drawing huge graphs. In _Proc. IEEE INFOVIS_, pp. 137–
[144, 2002. doi: 10.1109/INFVIS.2002.1173159 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/INFVIS.2002.1173159)

[50] J. F. Kruiger, P. E. Rauber, R. M. Martins, A. Kerren, S. Kobourov,
and A. C. Telea. Graph layouts by t-SNE. _Computer Graphics Forum_,


[36(3):283–294, 2017. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13187 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13187)

[51] M. Krzywinski, J. Schein, I. Birol, J. Connors, R. Gascoyne, D. Horsman,
S. J. Jones, and M. A. Marra. Circos: An information aesthetic for
comparative genomics. _Genome Research_ [, 19(9):1639–1645, 2009. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.092759.109)
[10.1101/gr.092759.109 1](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.092759.109)

[52] D. Kumar and J. C. Bezdek. Visual approaches for exploratory data
analysis: A survey of the visual assessment of clustering tendency (VAT)
family of algorithms. _IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Magazine_,
[6(2):10–48, 2020. doi: 10.1109/MSMC.2019.2961163 3](https://doi.org/10.1109/MSMC.2019.2961163)

[53] A. Lancichinetti, F. Radicchi, J. J. Ramasco, and S. Fortunato. Finding Statistically Significant Communities in Networks. _PLOS ONE_, 6(4):e18961,
[2011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018961 8](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018961)

[54] B. Lee, C. Plaisant, C. S. Parr, J.-D. Fekete, and N. Henry. Task taxonomy
for graph visualization. In _Proc. BELIV’06_, pp. 1–5. ACM, New York,
[2006. doi: 10.1145/1168149.1168168 1, 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/1168149.1168168)

[55] J. K. Lenstra. Clustering a data array and the traveling-salesman problem.
_Operations Research_ [, 22(2):413–414, 1974. doi: 10.1287/opre.22.2.413 2](https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.22.2.413)

[56] I. Liiv. Seriation and matrix reordering methods: An historical overview.
_Stat. Anal. Data Min._ [, 3(2):70–91, 2010. doi: 10.1002/sam.10071 2](https://doi.org/10.1002/sam.10071)

[57] E. Mäkinen and H. Siirtola. The barycenter heuristic and the reorderable
matrix. _Informatica_, 29:357–364, 2005. 2, 3, 4

[58] F. McGee, M. Ghoniem, G. Melançon, B. Otjacques, and B. Pinaud. The
state of the art in multilayer network visualization. _Computer Graphics_
_Forum_ [, 38(6):125–149, 2019. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13610 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13610)

[59] M. J. McGuffin. Simple algorithms for network visualization: A tutorial.
_Tsinghua Science and Technology_ [, 17(4):383–398, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TST.](https://doi.org/10.1109/TST.2012.6297585)
[2012.6297585 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/TST.2012.6297585)

[60] A. Meidiana, S.-H. Hong, P. Eades, and D. Keim. A quality metric for
visualization of clusters in graphs. In _Proc. GD_, pp. 125–138. Springer,
[Cham, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-35802-0_10 1, 2, 3, 6](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-35802-0_10)

[61] C. Muelder and K.-L. Ma. Rapid graph layout using space filling curves.
_IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics_, 14(6):1301–
[1308, 2008. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2008.158 2, 7](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2008.158)

[62] C. Mueller, B. Martin, and A. Lumsdaine. A comparison of vertex ordering
algorithms for large graph visualization. In _Proc. PacificVis_, pp. 141–148.
[IEEE, 2007. doi: 10.1109/APVIS.2007.329289 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/APVIS.2007.329289)

[63] T. Nagel and E. Duval. A visual survey of arc diagrams. In _IEEE Visual-_
_ization_, Posters, 2013. 2

[64] A. Noack. An energy model for visual graph clustering. In G. Liotta, ed.,
_Proc. GD_ [, pp. 425–436. Springer, Berlin, 2004. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24595-7_40)
[-24595-7_40 1, 2, 3](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24595-7_40)

[65] A. Noack. Energy models for graph clustering. _J. Graph Algorithms Appl._,
[11:453–480, 2007. doi: 10.7155/jgaa.00154 1, 2](https://doi.org/10.7155/jgaa.00154)

[66] A. Noack. Modularity clustering is force-directed layout. _Phys. Rev. E_,
[79(2):026102, 2009. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.79.026102 3](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.79.026102)

[67] C. Nobre, M. Meyer, M. Streit, and A. Lex. The state of the art in
visualizing multivariate networks. _Computer Graphics Forum_, 38(3):807–
[832, 2019. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13728 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13728)

[68] C. Nobre, D. Wootton, L. Harrison, and A. Lex. Evaluating multivariate
network visualization techniques using a validated design and crowdsourcing approach. In _Proc. CHI_ [, p. 1–12. ACM, New York, 2020. doi: 10.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376381)
[1145/3313831.3376381 2, 4, 6, 7](https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376381)

[69] A. Nocaj, M. Ortmann, and U. Brandes. Untangling the hairballs of multicentered, small-world online social media networks. _J. Graph Algorithms_
_Appl._ [, 19(2):595–618, 2015. doi: 10.7155/jgaa.00370 2, 3](https://doi.org/10.7155/jgaa.00370)

[70] M. Okoe, R. Jianu, and S. Kobourov. Node-link or adjacency matrices: Old question, new insights. _IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput. Graphics_,
[25(10):2940–2952, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865940 2, 4, 6, 7](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865940)

[71] J. Palowitch. Computing the statistical significance of optimized communities in networks. _Scientific Reports_ [, 9(1):18444, 2019. doi: 10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-54708-8)
[s41598-019-54708-8 8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-54708-8)

[72] T. P. Peixoto. _Descriptive vs. inferential community detection in net-_
_works: pitfalls, myths, and half-truths_ . Cambridge University Press, 2023.
[arXiv:2112.00183 [physics, stat]. doi: 10.1017/9781009118897 8](https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009118897)

[73] C. Perin, P. Dragicevic, and J.-D. Fekete. Revisiting bertin matrices: New
interactions for crafting tabular visualizations. _IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput._
_Graphics_ [, 20(12):2082–2091, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346279 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346279)

[74] J. Petit. Experiments on the minimum linear arrangement problem. _ACM J._
_Exp. Algorithmics_ [, 8, article no. 2.3, 33 pages, 2004. doi: 10.1145/996546.](https://doi.org/10.1145/996546.996554)
[996554 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/996546.996554)

[75] R. Rao and S. K. Card. The table lens: merging graphical and symbolic
representations in an interactive focus+ context visualization for tabular
information. In _Proc. CHI_ [, pp. 318–322. ACM, New York, 1994. doi: 10.](https://doi.org/10.1145/191666.191776)


[1145/191666.191776 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/191666.191776)

[76] L. Rossi and M. Magnani. Towards effective visual analytics on multiplex
and multilayer networks. _Chaos, Solitons & Fractals_, 72:68–76, 2015.
[doi: 10.1016/j.chaos.2014.12.022 5](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2014.12.022)

[77] P. J. Rousseeuw. Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and
validation of cluster analysis. _Journal of Computational and Applied_
_Mathematics_ [, 20:53–65, 1987. doi: 10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7 3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7)

[78] B. Shneiderman and A. Aris. Network visualization by semantic substrates.
_IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics_, 12(5):733–
[740, 2006. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2006.166 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2006.166)

[79] M. A. Smith, B. Shneiderman, N. Milic-Frayling, E. Mendes Rodrigues,
V. Barash, C. Dunne, T. Capone, A. Perer, and E. Gleave. Analyzing
(social media) networks with NodeXL. In _Proc. C&T ’09_, 10 pages, p.
[255–264. ACM, New York, USA, 2009. doi: 10.1145/1556460.1556497 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/1556460.1556497)

[80] W. S. Torgerson. Multidimensional scaling: I. theory and method. _Psy-_
_chometrika_ [, 17(4):401–419, 1952. doi: 10.1007/BF02288916 2](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02288916)

[81] J. Urbanek and P. Ringshia. Mephisto: A framework for portable, re[producible, and iterative crowdsourcing, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2301.](https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2301.05154)
[05154 5](https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2301.05154)

[82] F. van Ham and B. Rogowitz. Perceptual organization in user-generated
graph layouts. _IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph-_
_ics_ [, 14(6):1333–1339, 2008. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2008.155 1](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2008.155)

[83] C. Vehlow, F. Beck, and D. Weiskopf. Visualizing group structures in
graphs: A survey. _Computer Graphics Forum_ [, 36(6):201–225, 2017. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12872)
[10.1111/cgf.12872 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12872)

[84] T. von Landesberger, A. Kuijper, T. Schreck, J. Kohlhammer, J. van
Wijk, J.-D. Fekete, and D. Fellner. Visual analysis of large graphs: Stateof-the-art and future research challenges. _Computer Graphics Forum_,
[30(6):1719–1749, 2011. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01898.x 1, 2](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01898.x)

[85] M. Wallinger, D. Archambault, D. Auber, M. Nöllenburg, and J. Peltonen.
Edge-path bundling: A less ambiguous edge bundling approach. _IEEE_
_Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics_, 28(1):313–323,
[2022. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114795 7](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114795)

[86] M. Wattenberg. Arc diagrams: visualizing structure in strings. _Proc. IEEE_
_INFOVIS_ [, pp. 110–116, 2002. doi: 10.1109/INFVIS.2002.1173155 1, 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/INFVIS.2002.1173155)

[87] M. Wattenberg. Visual exploration of multivariate graphs. In _Proc. CHI_
_’06_ [, 9 pages, p. 811–819. ACM, New York, USA, 2006. doi: 10.1145/](https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124891)
[1124772.1124891 2](https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124891)

[88] P. C. Wong, H. Foote, P. Mackey, G. Chin, Z. Huang, and J. Thomas. A
space-filling visualization technique for multivariate small-world graphs.
_IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics_, 18(5):797–
[809, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2011.99 2](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2011.99)

[89] X. Xie, F. Song, Y. Liu, S. Wang, and D. Yu. Study on the effects of
display color mode and luminance contrast on visual fatigue. _IEEE Access_,
[9:35915–35923, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3061770 3](https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3061770)

[90] V. Yoghourdjian, D. Archambault, S. Diehl, T. Dwyer, K. Klein, H. C.
Purchase, and H.-Y. Wu. Exploring the limits of complexity: A survey of
empirical studies on graph visualisation. _Visual Informatics_, 2(4):264–282,
[2018. doi: 10.1016/j.visinf.2018.12.006 3](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visinf.2018.12.006)

[91] P. Zhang and C. Moore. Scalable detection of statistically significant
communities and hierarchies, using message passing for modularity. _Pro-_
_ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_, 111(51):18144–18149,
[2014. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1409770111 8](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1409770111)


12


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


**APPENDICES**

**Task completion time of Linlog versus orderable layouts**


Fig. 13: Overall task completion time for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = GEN**, baseline = Linlog. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells correspond
to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Linlog is significantly (up to 25%) slower than GEN-ordered Arc and Arc symmetric
in all quadrants, and slower than radial layouts for compact inseparable clusters.


Fig. 14: Overall task completion time for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = CR**, baseline = Linlog. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells correspond
to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Linlog is generally as fast as the CR-ordered orderable layouts, except for compact
inseparable clusters where arc does significantly better.


Fig. 15: Overall task completion time of cluster count for sizes = all, clusters = compact, **order = OLO**, baseline = Linlog. The dark matrix cells
correspond to Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Linlog is not significantly different from OLO-ordered orderable layouts.


13


**Task completion time of orderable layouts for loose and compact clusters**


Fig. 16: Task completion time for network sizes = all, **clusters = loose**, orders = { GEN, CR, OLO }. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells
correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. GEN-ordered orderable layouts lead to consistently faster cluster count
judgements compared to those ordered by OLO and CR with respect to loose clusters.


Fig. 17: Task completion time for network sizes = all, **clusters = compact**, orders = { GEN, CR, OLO }. On the right, the dark blue matrix
cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. OLO and CR are not statistically significantly different in any of the
compact cluster settings. GEN is faster than OLO when combined with arc and symmetric arc layouts. GEN beats CR occasionally with arc and
symmetric arc in some compact cluster settings. GEN, CR and OLO are on par when it comes to radial layouts.


14


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


**Comparison of backbone and orderable layouts**


Fig. 18: Overall **accuracy** of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = GEN**, baseline = backbone. On the right, the dark blue
matrix cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. GEN-ordered orderable layouts are significantly (up to
33%) more accurate than backbone for all cluster types. the orderable layouts achieve 100% accuracy, in almost all cluster settings. Radial layouts
have a greater variance than arc and arc symmetric.


Fig. 19: Task **completion time** for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = GEN**, baseline = backbone. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells correspond
to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. The lack of accuracy of backbone seen in Figure 18 also translates into slower
cluster count judgments in all cluster settings. Likewise, radial is always slower than arc layouts.


Fig. 20: Overall **accuracy** of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = CR**, baseline = backbone. On the right, the dark blue
matrix cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Backbone is less accurate than the CR-ordered orderable
layouts in all cluster settings, except in the case compact inseparable clusters where it cannot be distinguished from radial.


15


Fig. 21: Overall task **completion time** for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = CR**, baseline = backbone. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells
correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Backbone is significantly slower than CR-ordered orderable layouts for
compact clusters, and comparable in the case of loose clusters.


Fig. 22: Overall **accuracy** of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = OLO**, baseline = backbone. On the right, the dark blue
matrix cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Backbone is less accurate than the OLO-ordered orderable
layouts in all cluster settings, except in the case compact inseparable clusters where it cannot be distinguished from radial.


Fig. 23: Overall task **completion time** for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = OLO**, baseline = backbone. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells
correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. Backbone is slower than OLO-ordered orderable layouts for compact
and separable clusters. It is comparable to orderable layouts in the other cluster types, except for loose separable and compact inseparable clusters
where arc layouts are significantly faster.


16


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


**Comparison of sfdp and orderable layouts**


Fig. 24: Overall **accuracy** of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = GEN**, baseline = sfdp. On the right, the dark blue
matrix cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. sfdp is significantly (up to 60%) slower than GEN-ordered
orderable layouts for all cluster settings. All orderable layouts achieve 100% median accuracy. Radial layouts have a greater variance than arc and
symmetric arc layouts.


Fig. 25: Overall task **completion time** for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = GEN**, baseline = sfdp. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells correspond
to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. The poorer accuracy of sfdp observed in Figure 24 comes with short completion
time, indicating that the participants were discouraged by the relatively higher visual clutter in sfdp plots.


Fig. 26: Overall **accuracy** of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = CR**, baseline = sfdp. On the right, the dark blue matrix
cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. sfdp is significantly (up to 46%) slower than CR-ordered orderable
layouts for all cluster settings. All orderable layouts achieve high median accuracy, betwen 75% and 100%.


17


Fig. 27: Overall task **completion time** for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = CR**, baseline = sfdp. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells correspond
to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. The poorer accuracy of sfdp observed in Figure 26 comes with short completion
time, indicating that the participants were discouraged by the relatively higher visual clutter in sfdp plots.


Fig. 28: Overall **accuracy** of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = OLO**, baseline = sfdp. On the right, the dark blue
matrix cells correspond to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. sfdp is significantly (up to 43%) slower than OLO-ordered
orderable layouts for all cluster settings. All orderable layouts achieve high median accuracy, betwen 71% and 100%.


Fig. 29: Overall task **completion time** for sizes = all, clusters = all, **order = OLO**, baseline = sfdp. On the right, the dark blue matrix cells correspond
to the Bonferroni corrected _p ≤_ 0 _._ 05 for all pairwise comparisons. The poorer accuracy of sfdp observed in Figure 28 comes with short completion
time, indicating that the participants were discouraged by the relatively higher visual clutter in sfdp plots.


18


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


**The Effect of Network Size on Cluster Count in Force-Directed Layouts**


|Layout|Size|p-value|∆Median accuracy|
|---|---|---|---|
|Linlog|50*-100<br>50*-300<br>100*-300|_<_ 0_._001<br>_<_ 0_._001<br>0_._11|**8.33%**<br>**8.33%**<br>0%|
|Backbone|50*-100<br>50*-300<br>100*-300|_<_ 0_._001<br>_<_ 0_._001<br>0_._236|**5%**<br>**8.6%**<br>3.6%|
|SFDP|50*-100<br>50*-300<br>100*-300|_<_ 0_._001<br>_<_ 0_._001<br>_<_ 0_._001|**15%**<br>**32.1%**<br>**17.1%**|


Table 1: The difference in median accuracies for cluster count judgements between pairs of network sizes. Bold-faced values are statistically
significant. A star * marks the network size with higher accuracy. For Linlog, Backbone and SFDP, the accuracy is always better for the smaller
network size.


**Detailed p-value Tables**


Table 2: P-Values for cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = GEN, baseline = Linlog (see the corresponding matrix Fig. 8).


19


Table 3: P-Values for cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = CR, baseline = Linlog (see the corresponding matrix Fig. 9).


Table 4: P-Values for cluster count accuracy for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = OLO, baseline = Linlog (see the corresponding matrix Fig. 10).


20


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


Table 5: P-Values for overall task completion time for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = GEN, baseline = Linlog (see the corresponding matrix Fig. 13).


Table 6: P-Values for overall task completion time for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = CR, baseline = Linlog (see the corresponding matrix Fig. 14).


21


Table 7: P-Values for overall task completion time for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = OLO, baseline = Linlog (see the corresponding matrix Fig. 15).


Table 8: P-Values for overall accuracy of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = GEN, baseline = backbone (see the
corresponding matrix Fig. 18).


22


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


Table 9: P-Values for overall completion time for network sizes = all, clusters = all, order = GEN, baseline = backbone (see the corresponding matrix
Fig. 19).


Table 10: P-Values for overall accuracy of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = CR, baseline = backbone (see the
corresponding matrix Fig. 20).


23


Table 11: P-Values for overall completion time for network sizes = all, clusters = all, order = CR, baseline = backbone (see the corresponding matrix
Fig. 21).


Table 12: P-Values for overall accuracy of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = OLO, baseline = backbone (see the
corresponding matrix Fig. 22).


24


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


Table 13: P-Values for overall completion time for network sizes = all, clusters = all, order = OLO, baseline = backbone (see the corresponding matrix
Fig. 23).


Table 14: P-Values for overall accuracy of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = GEN, baseline = sfdp (see the corresponding
matrix Fig. 24).


25


Table 15: P-Values for overall completion time for network sizes = all, clusters = all, order = GEN, baseline = sfdp (see the corresponding matrix
Fig. 25).


Table 16: P-Values for overall accuracy of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = CR, baseline = sfdp (see the corresponding
matrix Fig. 26).


26


_© 2024 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and_
_[Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/](https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/)_


Table 17: P-Values for overall completion time for network sizes = all, clusters = all, order = CR, baseline = sfdp (see the corresponding matrix
Fig. 27).


Table 18: P-Values for overall accuracy of cluster count judgments for sizes = all, clusters = all, order = OLO, baseline = sfdp (see the corresponding
matrix Fig. 28).


27


Table 19: P-Values for overall completion time for network sizes = all, clusters = all, order = OLO, baseline = sfdp (see the corresponding matrix
Fig. 29).


28
